In a graph, we can have multiple
paths between the same two vertices.
For example between these two vertices, we
can have this path, this path, this path,
and many other ones. But, they differ in length,
for example the length of the first one is 5,
the length of second one is 2, and
the length of the third one is 3.
Note that the length of a path is the number of
edges it passes from. And given an integer n that
represents the number of vertices, labeled from
0 to n-1, an array edges of undirected edges, a
vertex start and a vertex end, we want to find the
minimum number of edges to go from start to end.
If it's not possible to go from start to end,
return -1. In a previous lecture, we solved the
problem of checking if a vertex is reachable from
another vertex, we solved it by using depth-first
search. We can think of using the same solution,
we just slightly change the code, to count the
number of traversed edges before we reach the end
vertex, and we get a solution for this problem.
But it's not a valid solution, simply because dfs
guarantees to find a vertex when it's reachable,
which was enough for the previous problem,
but doesn't guarantee to reach it by using
as few edges as possible, which is
what we want to do for this problem.
Let me show you an example, we have this graph,
start is A, and end is H. We start from A.
We're applying depth-first search by the way.
We start from A. Its neighbors are B E F and C,
we go to B. Its neighbors are D E and A,
we go to D. Neighbors of D are G E and B,
we go to G. Neighbors of G are D E F H and
J, we go to H. We found the end vertex,
so our function would return 4, the number
of edges we traversed before reaching end.
Which is not the right output, because we have
a path that reaches end with 2 edges only.
We deduce that dfs, when used this way at
least, doesn't always give us the right answer.
The right algorithm to use
for this problem is bfs.
Why bfs? Bfs traverses vertices level by level.
It means that it traverses vertices that are at a
distance of 0 from where we start, then those at a
distance of 1, then at a distance of 2, and so on.
Which implies the fact that when we step on a
vertex for the first time, its level is guaranteed
to represent the minimum number of edges to reach
it. For example in this graph, at level 0 we had
A, it means that we need at least 0 edges to reach
A from A. Then at level 1 we had B C D, it means
that we need at least 1 edge to reach B or C
or D from A. Then at level 2 we had E F H I J,
it means that we need at least 2 edges to reach
them from A. And so on for remaining vertices.
So to solve this problem, we apply breadth-first
search starting from start, and as soon as we find
end, we return its level, because it represents
the minimum number of edges to reach it,
we cannot find a shorter path, because otherwise
we would have found end in previous levels.
And if after performing bfs we don't find end, it
means that end is not reachable at all from start,
we return -1. Okay but how to implement this?
In the solution explanation it's said that as
soon as we find end, we return its level,
but how to know the level of a vertex?
To maintain levels of vertices, instead
of storing the vertex only in the queue,
we store a tuple that contains the vertex and
its level. The initial vertex has a level of 0,
then every time we enqueue a neighbor, we take
the level of the actual vertex and we add 1.
For example here we start from A, its level is
0. It unlocks B, C, D, their level is the level
of A + 1, 0+1, which is 1. Then we move to B, it
unlocks two new vertices E and F, their level is
the level of B + 1, 1+1, which is 2. Then we move
to C, it doesn't unlock anything. Then we move to
D, it unlocks three new vertices H I and J, their
level is the level of D + 1, 1+1, which is 2.
Then we move to E, it unlocks K, its level is
the level of E + 1, 2+1, which is 3. And so on.
In code, we build the graph as we did path exists
with dfs, and we create the queue and the visited
set. In the queue now, initially we store a tuple
that contains the initial vertex, and 0, its
level. Then while the queue still has elements, we
extract two things now, the vertex and the level.
We pop once from the queue but
it's a tuple of 2 elements,
we can put them in two variables vertex and level.
Here we check, we check if the vertex we popped
is the one we're searching for, because if it's
the case, we return its level, it represents the
minimum number of edges to go from start to it.
If it's not the case, we continue working, for
each neighbor, if it's not visited, we enqueue.
But now we don't enqueue the neighbor only, we
also enqueue its level. This is why we enqueue
a tuple of 2 elements, neighbor, and level+1.
Level represents the level of the actual vertex,
so the new unvisited vertex, the neighbor, is
at the next level, this is why we write level+1.
And we put neighbor in visited obviously. After
the loop, if the function didn't return a result
yet it means that we didn't find end, we
return -1, as required by the problem.
For the time complexity, we're creating an array
of n elements, then we're traversing m edges to
fill the adjacency list, where m is the number of
edges, then we're using breadth-first search once.
And when using bfs once, we don't have the
cost of traversing the vertices, which is n,
we just have the cost of iterations of the while
loop, which is in O(|E|), O(m) in this problem,
as explained previously. The total is
n+m+O(m), we get O(n+m) time complexity.
And for the space complexity, in the
worst case, we have n+m for the graph,
2n for the size of the queue, because we store
n tuples of 2 elements, n for the size of the
visited set, in total we have 4n+m, this
solution has an O(n+m) space complexity.
We've come to the end of this lecture, we've
seen a problem where we compared dfs and bfs,
and we've seen why bfs is more
suitable for this problem.
If you didn't understand something, ask
questions, and see you in the next one.